So large language models or LLMs,
they've just completely changed the
game, right? I mean, they're writing our
emails, they're coding our software, and
they're even drafting legal docs. But
how in the world do they actually work?
And maybe more importantly, what happens
when they go wrong? In this explainer,
we're going to break it all down. It's
this wild paradox, you know? On one
hand, these things are just
astonishingly powerful. They can
generate creative stories. They can
summarize super complex articles. They
can even write code for you. But then
there's the other side. They have this
bizarre and sometimes pretty dangerous
habit of just making stuff up. And that
central tension is what makes them so
fascinating. To really understand that
contradiction, we've got to look under
the hood. So, let's get into the
mechanics of how these incredible and
sometimes incredibly wrong models
actually do what they do. Okay, we're
starting with the real building blocks
here. How does a machine even begin to
learn what a word means? And how does it
string all those words together to
create something that sounds well human?
It really all boils down to this one
simple idea. An LLM is a prediction
machine. That's it. Its one and only job
is to guess the most likely next word in
a sentence. You give it the cat sat on
the and it just runs the numbers and
picks what's most probable. You do that
a billion times a second and suddenly
you get everything from poetry to Python
code. But wait, how does a computer even
understand words to begin with? It uses
this thing called word vectors.
Honestly, the best way to think about it
is like GPS coordinates for words.
Instead of a spot on a map, every single
word gets a set of coordinates in this
massive imaginary meaning space. So
words like cat, kitten, and dog are all
huddled close together, while cat and
say car are miles apart. This is what
lets the model see relationships between
words using math. And the way they learn
happens in two big stages. First up is
pre-training. Think of this like the
model binge reading a massive library,
like pretty much the whole internet,
just to get a general vibe for how the
world and language work. Then comes
fine-tuning. This is like sending that
super well- read model to law school or
med school. It takes all that general
knowledge and gets laser focused on a
specific job, becoming an expert in,
say, legal analysis or customer support.
Okay, so we've got this incredibly
powerful prediction engine, but what
happens when its most statistically
probable guess is just flatout wrong?
Well, that's when we hit the biggest,
most talked about problem with LLMs,
hallucinations.
And this quote from recent research just
nails the danger here. See, a
hallucination isn't just a wrong answer.
Oh, no. It's a wrong answer that sounds
incredibly confident and totally
correct. It's basically a convincing lie
from a machine that doesn't even know
it's lying. Yeah, let's be super clear
about what we mean by hallucination.
It's not just a simple error. It's a
confident fabrication. The model is
completely wrong, but it delivers the
wrong information with the authority of
an expert. And that's what makes it so
tricky and so dangerous. And look, this
is not some abstract theoretical
problem. This is happening right now. In
2023, a lawyer in New York actually used
Chat GPT to help write a legal brief.
The AI did its job and cited a bunch of
previous cases to support the argument.
The only problem, every single one of
them was fake. He made them up. The
lawyer submitted them to the court and
well, you can imagine how that ended.
It's a perfect and kind of scary
reminder of what happens when we trust
these systems a little too blindly. So
for years the conventional wisdom was
that hallucinations were just a garbage
in garbage out kind of problem. You know
you feed it messy data from the internet
or there are some weird quirks in the
model's design and this is what you get.
And while it's definitely part of the
story, it turns out the real reason is
much more fundamental. The latest
thinking completely reframes this. It's
not a data problem. It's an incentive
problem. The way we train these models
actually rewards them for giving a
confident sounding answer, any answer,
instead of just admitting, "Hey, I don't
know." The whole system basically
encourages them to bluff instead of
being cautiously accurate. It's not a
bug. It's a core feature of how they're
designed. Hallucinations are a huge
issue for sure, but honestly, they're
just the tip of the iceberg. As we zoom
out, you start to see this whole
landscape of ethical problems that we're
only just now starting to get our heads
around. You see, when you train an AI on
the internet, you're basically holding
up a mirror to all of us, the good, the
bad, and the really ugly. So, these
models can end up amplifying harmful
stereotypes. They can generate fake news
at a terrifying scale. Their carbon
footprint from all that training is
massive. And that's not even getting
into the black box problem where we
don't really know how they're making
their choices, or the very real privacy
risk of them just spitting out sensitive
data they accidentally memorized. The
ethical minefield here is vast. So with
all these complex challenges, who are
the people and the companies actually
building this future? Right now, the AI
world is kind of split into two main
camps and they have very different ideas
about how to move forward. On one side,
you've got your proprietary models.
Think of these as the secret recipe
high-end stuff from companies like
OpenAI and Anthropic. They're super
powerful, but how they work on the
inside is a closely guarded secret. On
the other side, you've got the open-
source movement. here. The model's code
and data are out there for everyone to
see, to use, and to build on. It's all
about community, transparency, and super
fast innovation. So, here's a quick look
at the 2026 landscape. On the
proprietary team, you've got OpenAI's
GPT5, which is just a powerhouse of
general reasoning. Then there's
Anthropics Claude 4, which is really
focused on safety and can handle huge
amounts of text. Over in the open source
corner, you've got Meta Lama 4 with its
absolutely massive context window and
Alibaba's QN 3.5, which is designed to
run with incredible performance right on
your home computer. And that brings us
to the final and maybe most critical
question. The industry is starting to
realize that maybe the goal isn't to get
rid of hallucinations completely. That
might just be impossible. The new goal
is something called calibrated
uncertainty. Basically, building an AI
that knows what it doesn't know. So the
real question for our future is are we
ready to build and more importantly to
trust an AI that has the wisdom to just
say I don't know
>> if you have made it this far you are
clearly serious about tech follow and
subscribe to Dark Shark AI to stay ahead
of the curve. Want a deeper dive into
the how LLMs actually function? comments
sharp below and I will prioritize a
detailed master class for